
=== Page 1 ===
Homework Assignment 5
This homework assignment is for AE 8803 Hamiltonian Mechanics in Space Dynamics (Fall
2025). The deadline for this assignment is 12/02/2025, 11:59 PM ET. Submit through
Canvas (1) a summary document that describes your approach and solutions, and (2) a
developed program. The summary document must be concise and coherent. You may use
a Latex template through pre-Notes Latex files on Canvas. The developed code must be
uploaded and should be executable without any setting change (including the necessity of
creating an executable file, i.e., Fortran, C, C++, etc.) on the instructor’s side. If it
does not run under this condition, the code is considered non-compliant, leading to zero
credits without exception. A violation of the submission policy leads to zero credits for the
designated problem. This assignment does not accept late submission, given that
the planned deadline is the final date of class. The total score for this assignment
is 100 points, which will be converted to 15% of the final grade. If you find typos
or need clarification, please contact the instructors.
1. This problem uses the 2D circular restricted three-body problem (CRTBP) and the
3D torque-free rigid body dynamics (TFBRP). Consider a hypothetical scenario that
your space station is staying at the Earth-Moon L4 point. The space station is also
tumbling. Using a symplectic integrator based on the 6th-order Yoshida method, your
task is to investigate how its dynamical motion evolves over the next 25 years. There
are multiple constraints:
(a) Code must integrate both orbital and rigid body states in the same loop. In other
words, do not split it into two separate programs.
(b) How to formulate the symplectic integrator is up to you, but make sure that
differential energy, i.e., the absolute difference of the energy at a given time from
the initial energy, is always less than 10−12, and each component of differential
angular momentum, i.e., the absolute difference of the angular momentum at a
given time from the initial angular momentum, is less than 10−8.
Compile your methodology and results in your Latex-based document. The credit
policy for the CRTBP is below:
(a) Methodology (25 pt) – How to formulate the 6th-order Yoshida method for the
given problem.
(b) Results (25 pt) – Results from your simulations. Mandated figures include (1)
the derived 2D spatial trajectory and (2) the time evolution (with units of years)
of differential energy in semilogy space.
The credit policy for the TFBRP is below:
(a) Methodology (25 pt) – How to formulate the 6th-order Yoshida method for the
given problem.
(b) Results (25 pt) – Results from your simulations. Mandated figures include the
time evolution (with units of years) of (1) the derived angular momentum, (2)
differential energy, and (3) differential angular momentum.
1

=== Page 2 ===
The baseline initial state and physical constants are compiled in Table 1. Not all
quantities are listed here as they do not impact simulation performance significantly.
Make sure, however, that the space station can stay around the Earth-Moon L4 point
for 25 years. The instructor confirmed that the initial state within 1,000 km from the
Lagrange point could make the space station stay for the entire time.
Table 1: Baseline initial state and physical constants. Assume that the space station is an
ellipsoid with a dimension of 2 a×2b×2c, and its mass is given as volume times density.
Notation Number Units
CRTBP setting
Earth mass 5 .9722×1024[kg]
Moon mass 7 .3477×1022[kg]
Distance between Earth and Moon 384 ,400×103[m]
TFBRP setting
Semi-major axis a 10 [m]
Semi-intermediate axis b 5 [m]
Semi-minor axis c 4 [m]
Density ρ 1,000 [kg m−3]
Initial angular velocity ξcomponent 1 ×10−7[s−1]
Initial angular velocity ηcomponent 1 ×10−8[s−1]
Initial angular velocity ζcomponent 1 ×10−5[s−1]
2
